1장 samādhi (Meditation)
1-1 This is the yoga handbook.
1-2 Yoga is the cessation (nirodha) of mental activity (citta-vṛtti).
1-3 Then (when mental activity ceases) the seer is established in his “original essence” (svarūpa).
1-4 Otherwise, there is identification with mental activity.
1-5 Mental activity is fivefold and is afflictive or nonafflictive.
1-6 (Mental activity consists of) valid knowledge (pramāṇa), invalid knowledge (viparyaya), verbal construction (vikalpa), sleep (nidrā), and memory (smṛti).
1-7 Valid knowledge is based on sense-perception, inference and reliable testimony.
1-8 Invalid knowledge is false perception of an object, not as it is.
1-9 Verbal construction (vikalpa) is reference-less (vastu-śūnya), and based merely on verbal proficiency (śabda-jñāna–anupātī).
1-10 Sleep is mental activity based on the experience of something which does not exist.
1-11 Memory is conservation of an object experienced in the past.
1-12 The cessation of these (vṛtti-s or instances of mental activity) is accomplished through repetitive practice (abhyāsa) and dispassion (vairāgya).
1-13 Abhyāsa is the effort to achieve stability (of “empty,” motionless mind).
1-14 It is firmly grounded if performed attentively and ceaselessly for a long period of time.
1-15 Dispassion (vairāgya) is thirstlessness toward objects seen and heard, which is a sign of control (vaśīkāra-saṃjñā).
1-16 Ultimate vairāgya is thirstlessness toward the guṇa-s, arising from the vision of puruṣa (puruṣa-khyāti).
1-17 Cognitive (saṃprajñāta) samādhi (or cognitive yogic meditation) consists of vitarka (absorption in sthūla or concrete objects), vicāra (absorption in sūkṣma or subtle objects), ānanda (feeling of joy), and asmitā (“I-sense”).
1-18 In the other (type of samādhi, i.e. asaṃparjñāta or “noncognitive” samādhi), achieved through repetitive practice of the cessation of mental activity, only the saṃskāra-s (“karmic impressions”) remain.
1-19 (In the case of) videha (“bodiless”) and prakṛti-laya (“merged in prakṛti” yogin-s, samādhi) occurs from birth.
1-20 The others (attain asaṃprajñāta samādhi) through certainty (śraddhā, that it is attainable), power (vīrya), mindfulness (smṛti), (saṃprajñāta) samādhi, and yogic insight (prajñā).
1-21 (Asaṃprajñāta samādhi) is nearer to (those who practice) most intensely.
1-22 As (the intensity in practice can be) mild, medium or extreme, there is a difference (in the yogin’s proximity to asaṃprajñāta samādhi).
1-23 Or (samādhi may be accomplished) through devotion to īśvara.
1-24 īśvara is a special puruṣa untouched by the kleśa-s (“causes of affliction”), by action and its fruits, and by “long-term karmic imprints” (āśaya).
1-25 In him, the unequaled seed of omniscience is rooted.
1-26 He is the guru of even the yogin-s of the past, being unbound by time.
1-27 His sound is praṇava (the syllable OM).
1-28 Its repetition arouses devotion to him whom it denotes (namely īśvara).
1-29 Then the consciousness turns inwards, and the obstacles disappear.
1-30 The obstacles (antarāya-s) are illness, dullness, doubt, carelessness, laziness, lack of dispassion, delusion, failure in attaining a certain stage, and instability (in an attained stage).
1-31 Pain (duḥkha), mental pain (daurmanasya), trembling limbs, and (unregulated) inhalation and exhalation accompany these distractions.
1-32 To counteract these (distractions, the yogin’s) abhyāsa (repetitive practice, should focus) on one principle (eka-tattva).
1-33 Through practice of friendliness (maitrī), compassion (karuṇā), joy (muditā), and equanimity (upekṣa) toward the happy, the suffering, the virtuous, and the unvirtuous (respectively), consciousness is clarified.
1-34 Or, through exhalation and retention of breath.
1-35 Or, through the activation of subtle sense-perception (viṣaya-vatī), stability of mind (is established).
1-36 Or, through sorrow-less illumination.
1-37 Or, through a mind free from attachment.
1-38 Or, through knowledge attained during sleep while dreaming.
1-39 Or, through meditation (dhyāna) on a desired object.
1-40 The mastery (of a yogin who has attained stability of mind) extends from the minutest particle to the largest entity.
1-41 In the case of (a yogin whose) mental activity has decreased, (whose consciousness is as clear) as a transparent jewel, a merging (samāpatti) of perceiver (grahītṛ), perception (grahaṇa), and perceived object (grāhya) takes place.
1-42 savitarkā samāpatti (“contemplative meditation” centered on sthūla or concrete objects) is mixed with verbal construction (vikalpa) consisting of sounds (or words), objects (or referents), and ideas (jñāna).
1-43 nirvitarkā (samāpatti) (“meditation beyond contemplation”) occurs when memory is purified (i.e., emptied of its contents), consciousness as if emptied of its (subjective) nature, and the object (of meditation) alone shines forth.
1-44 In the same way, (two other samāpatti-s or meditation-types), centered on sūkṣma or subtle objects, are explained: savicārā (“reflective meditation”) and nirvicārā (“meditation beyond reflectivity”).
1-45 The objects can be subtle to the extent of being without-qualities (aliṅga).
1-46 All these (types of meditation) are included within the object-centered (sa-bīja) samādhi category.
1-47 When (the meditative state called) nirvicāra becomes lucid, clarity emanating from the inner-self occurs.
1-48 In this (clarity), prajñā (yogic insight) is truth-bearing (ṛtam-bharā).
1-49 (ṛtam-bharā prajñā or truth-bearing yogic insight) is essentially different from knowledge based on reliable testimony and inference as it touches on particulars.
1-50 The saṃskāra (“karmic impression”) produced by it (by truth-bearing yogic insight) counteracts other saṃskāra-s.
1-51 When there is cessation even of this (saṃskāra), with the cessation of everything (of every vṛtti and saṃskāra), this is objectless (nir-bīja) samādhi.

2장 sādhana (Praxis)
2-1 Practical yoga (kriyā-yoga) consists of tapas, daily recitation (svādhyāya), and devotion to īśvara (īśvara-praṇidhāna).
2-2 Its purpose is to bring about samādhi and diminish the kleśa-s (“causes of affliction”).
2-3 The kleśa-s are avidyā, “I-sense” (asmitā), attraction (rāga), aversion (dveṣa), and clinging to life (or fear of death, abhiniveśa).
2-4 avidyā is the breeding-ground of the other kleśa-s, whether they are dormant (prasupta), weak (tanu), interrupted (vicchinna), or stimulated (udāra).
2-5 avidyā is misidentification of the impermanent as permanent, the impure as pure, the painful as joyous, and nonselfhood as selfhood.
2-6 “I-sense” (asmitā) comes into being when the power of the seer (dṛk-śakti) and the power of seeing (darśana-śakti) appear to be one and the same.
2-7 Attraction (rāga) follows pleasure.
2-8 Aversion (dveṣa) follows pain.
2-9 Clinging to life (abhiniveśa) is a natural inclination rooted even in the wise.
2-10 In their subtle form, they (the kleśa-s) can be overcome by involution (pratiprasava).
2-11 In their (gross) active form, they (the kleśa-s) can be overcome through meditation (dhyāna).
2-12 (The consequences of) the “karmic storage” (karmāśaya), of which the kleśa-s are the root, are felt in this or in the following lifetimes.
2-13 As long as the root (mūla) exists, it is bound to bear fruits in the form of birth, life-span, and nature of experiences.
2-14 These fruits are pleasant or painful on account of pure or impure cause (i.e., according to the “stored karma”).
2-15 Owing to the suffering inherent in change, in pain (tapas), in the (ripening of) saṃskāra-s and in the strife of the fluctuating guṇa-s, all is suffering for the discerning.
2-16 Suffering which has not yet come can be prevented.
2-17 The conjunction (saṃyoga) of seer (draṣṭṛ) and seen (dṛśya) is the cause of that which is to be prevented (i.e., the cause of suffering).
2-18 The seen consists of brightness, action, and inertia; the elements (bhūta) and the sense organs (indriya) are its essence; worldly experience (bhoga) and release from it (apavarga) are its (dual) purpose.
2-19 The layers of the guṇa (or prakṛti realm) are the particularized (viśeṣa), the unparticularized (aviśeṣa), the “mere designator” (liṅga-mātra), and the unmanifest (aliṅga).
2-20 The seer (draṣṭṛ) is pure seeing (dṛśi-mātra). Although pure (i.e., content-less), he “sees” mental activity.
2-21 The essence of the seen is just for his (the seer’s, puruṣa’s) sake.
2-22 Even though “she” (prakṛti, the seen) ceases to exist in respect of “him” (a certain puruṣa) for whose sake “her” purpose has been achieved, “she” continues to exist for others (for other puruṣa-s who are still afflicted by avidyā), being as “she” is of a common nature.
2-23 The conjunction (saṃyoga, of seer and seen, puruṣa and prakṛti) brings about understanding with regard to the (separate) powers of the “property” (prakṛti) and its “owner” (puruṣa).
2-24 The cause (of this conjunction) is avidyā.
2-25 When (avidyā) ceases to exist, the conjunction also ceases. This is yogic cessation (hāna), the aloneness (kaivalya) of pure seeing (dṛśi).
2-26 Steady (aviplava) yogic discernment (viveka-khyāti, namely awareness of the absolute difference between prakṛti and puruṣa) is the means of cessation.
2-27 The sevenfold yogic insight (prajñā) arises in him (who has attained steady viveka-khyāti).
2-28 Through the practice (anuṣṭhāna) of the limbs of yoga (yoga-aṅga), with the annihilation of impurity, the light of knowledge shines toward viveka-khyāti.
2-29 The eight limbs are yama (primary ethical guidelines), niyama (secondary ethical guidelines), āsana (yogic posture), prāṇāyāma (breath control), pratyāhāra (withdrawal of the senses), dhāraṇā (meditation phase I), dhyāna (meditation phase II), and samādhi (meditation phase III).
2-30 The yama-s (primary ethical guidelines) are nonviolence (ahiṃsā), truthfulness (satya), nontheft (asteya), celibacy (brahmacarya), and nonpossessiveness (aparigraha).
2-31 Observing these (yama-s), irrespective of birth, place, time, circumstances, or even a sense of duty, is “the great vow” (mahāvrata).
2-32 The niyama-s (secondary ethical guidelines) are yogic cleansing (śauca), contentment (saṃtoṣa), tapas, daily recitation (svādhyāya), and devotion to īśvara (īśvara-praṇidhāna).
2-33 To stop thoughts which contradict the yama-s, one should cultivate their opposite.
2-34 To cultivate the opposite is (to reflect upon the fact) that thoughts which contradict the yama-s, such as violent thoughts and so on, whether executed, planned to be executed, or even approved, whether driven by greed, anger, or delusion, whether mild, moderate, or intense, result in endless suffering (duḥkha) and ignorance (ajñāna).
2-35 In the presence of (a yogin) firmly established in ahiṃsā (nonviolence), violence ceases.
2-36 For (a yogin) firmly established in satya (truthfulness), the fruit (of action) is in the action itself.
2-37 (A yogin) firmly established in asteya (nontheft, is rewarded with) jewels appearing from every direction.
2-38 (A yogin) firmly established in brahmacarya (celibacy, acquires) power.
2-39 (A yogin) firmly established in aparigraha (nonpossessiveness, acquires) knowledge of the why and how (kathaṃtā) of (previous and future) births.
2-40 Śauca (yogic cleansing) results in disgust with respect to one’s own body and avoidance of contact with others.
2-41 And (also results) in sattva-śuddhi (sattvic purity), cheerfulness (saumanasya), one-pointedness, control over the sense organs and the capacity of ātma-darśana (self-vision).
2-42 saṃtoṣa (contentment) brings about unsurpassed joy.
2-43 tapas results in perfection of the body and the senses, owing to the destruction of impurity.
2-44 As a result of mantra recitation (svādhyāya, the yogin can) contact a chosen deity.
2-45 As a result of devotion to īśvara, samādhi is attained.
2-46 āsana (yogic posture) is comfortably stable.
2-47 (It is perfected through) relaxation within effort, and meditation (samāpatti) on the infinite.
2-48 Then (the yogin) is not affected by opposites (or dualities, dvandva-s).
2-49 Following (āsana), prāṇāyāma which is suspension of the flow of inhalation and exhalation (is practiced).
2-50 (prāṇāyāma is) external (bāhya, i.e., suspension of respiration after exhalation, when the lungs are empty), internal (abhyantara, i.e., suspension of respiration after inhalation, when the lungs are full) and stationary (stambha, i.e., suspension of respiration “midway,” when the lungs are neither necessarily empty nor full). It is regulated by bodily location, time, and counting, and is long and subtle.
2-51 (prāṇāyāma of the) fourth kind exceeds the scope of external and internal.
2-52 Then the covering of (the inner) light dissolves.
2-53 And the mind is ready for meditation (dhāraṇā).
2-54 pratyāhāra is a state in which the sense organs as if follow the “original essence” of the mind by disconnecting themselves from their objects.
2-55 Then there is absolute control over the senses.

3장 vibhūti (Powers)
3-1 dhāraṇā is the fixation of consciousness on a single spot (or object).
3-2 dhyāna is even flow of consciousness (in the course of dhāraṇā) toward it (toward the object meditated upon).
3-3 When the object alone shines forth (in consciousness, in the course of dhyāna), as if (consciousness) is empty of its (subjective) essence, this is samādhi.
3-4 The three together (dhāraṇā, dhyāna and samādhi are called) saṃyama.
3-5 By mastery of that (mastery of saṃyama), yogic insight (prajñā) arises.
3-6 It (saṃyama) is to be applied at every stage (of practice).
3-7 The three (meditative yoga-limbs) are more internal than the preceding limbs.
3-8 However these limbs are external compared to objectless samādhi.
3-9 When vyutthāna-saṃskāra-s (activating the citta or consciousness in external, object-centered mode) are overpowered, and nirodha-saṃskāra-s (enabling consciousness to turn inwardly) emerge, this is nirodha-pariṇāma (nirodha-transformation), characterized by (increasing) moments of nirodha (cessation or “no-mind”).
3-10 A flow of silent (consciousness, or a “continuous moment” of cessation) (praśānta-vāhitā) is brought about by (nirodha-) saṃskāra-s.
3-11 When there is a decrease of the (tendency of consciousness) to disperse in different directions and an increase of (its capacity of) one-pointedness, this is samādhi-pariṇāma (samādhi-transformation).
3-12 Then, when the content of consciousness (or the object of meditation as “projected” on the “screen” of consciousness) remains exactly the same in two consecutive instances (śānta-uditau), this is ekāgratā-pariṇāma (transformation of one-pointedness).
3-13 In the same way, dharma-pariṇāma, lakṣaṇa-pariṇāma, and avasthā-pariṇāma (transformations of form, time-variation, and condition) are explained, at the (external level of the) elements (bhūta) and the senses (indriya).
3-14 A dharmin (“form-bearer”) is “he” whom a series of past, present, and future (śānta-udita-avyapadeśya) dharma-s (“forms”) belong to.
3-15 Variation at the (inner level of) krama (sequence, which the yogin alone can perceive) is the cause of variation at the (external level of) pariṇāma.
3-16 Through saṃyama (yogic meditation) on the three pariṇāma-types, knowledge of past and future is obtained.
3-17 The mutual superimposition (adhyāsa) of sound (or word), object (or referent), and idea creates confusion. Through saṃyama on the distinction between these (language-components), knowledge of the sounds of every living creature is obtained.
3-18 Through sākṣāt-karaṇa (direct yogic perception) of the saṃskāra-s, knowledge of previous births is obtained.
3-19 (Through sākṣāt-karaṇa) of mental content (pratyaya), knowledge of (the content of) other minds is obtained.
3-20 This (knowledge) does not include (other factors) which determine (the content of the mind looked into), since they are not the object (of sākṣāt-karaṇa).
3-21 Through saṃyama on the kāya-rūpa, when the capacity of the body to be perceived is suspended and the contact between the eyes (of other people) and the light (which the body reflects) is cutoff (the yogin acquires) invisibility.
3-22 karma is of two types: sa-upakrama and nir-upakrama (“with nearness” and “without nearness” respectively, namely quick or slow in bearing fruits). Through saṃyama on that, or by omens (ariṣṭa), foreknowledge of death is obtained.
3-23 (Through saṃyama) on friendliness etc., (the yogin acquires) powers.
3-24 (Through saṃyama) on powers (the yogin acquires) powers such as that of an elephant etc.
3-25 By focusing the light of (extraordinary) sense-activity, knowledge of the subtle, hidden and remote is attained.
3-26 Through saṃyama on the sun, knowledge of the universe is attained.
3-27 (Through saṃyama) on the moon, knowledge of the arrangement of the stars is attained.
3-28 (Through saṃyama) on the pole star, knowledge of their movement (the movement of the stars) is attained.
3-29 (Through saṃyama) on the navel wheel (or navel cakra), knowledge of the arrangement of the body is attained.
3-30 (Through saṃyama) on the cavity below the throat (kaṇṭha-kūpa), cessation of hunger and thirst is attained.
3-31 (Through saṃyama) on the “tortoise channel” (kūrma-nāḍī), steadiness is attained.
3-32 (Through saṃyama) on the light at the top of the head (mūrdha-jyoti), vision of the siddha-s (the accomplished yogin-s of the past) is attained.
3-33 Or through prātibha (yogic illumination), everything (is known).
3-34 (Through saṃyama) on the heart, knowledge pertaining to consciousness (citta-saṃvit) is obtained.
3-35 Phenomenal experience (bhoga) is based on nondistinction between the radically distinct sattva and puruṣa. Through saṃyama on (the fact that sattva, or the citta, or prakṛti is) for the sake of “the other” (puruṣa), as opposed to (puruṣa’s) self-sufficiency (sva-artha), knowledge of puruṣa is obtained.
3-36 Hence prātibha and extraordinary senses of hearing, feeling, seeing, tasting, and smelling arise.
3-37 These are obstacles to samādhi, but nevertheless attainments when consciousness is directed outwardly (to the world).
3-38 By loosening the causes of bondage (to one’s body) and through pracāra-saṃvedana (knowing the technique of moving the prāṇa or vital force in the body and out of it at will), the mind (citta) can enter another body.
3-39 Through mastery of the udāna (up-breath or speech-breath, the yogin is) not attached to water, mud, thorns, and so on, and (is capable of) levitation (utkrānti).
3-40 Through mastery of the samāna (mid-breath or digestive-breath, the yogin’s body becomes) radiant.
3-41 Through saṃyama on the relation between ear and space, divine hearing is attained.
3-42 Through saṃyama on the relation of body (kāya) and space (ākāśa), and samāpatti on the lightness of cotton, the capacity of moving freely in space is obtained.
3-43 A state in which the (citta or consciousness) functions spontaneously (akalpitā) outside the body is called mahāvideha (great disembodiment). It results in the elimination of the covering of the (inner) light.
3-44 Through saṃyama on the gross (sthūla), intrinsic (svarūpa), subtle (sūkṣma), relational (anvaya) and purposive (arthavattva) aspects of the elements—mastery over them (bhūta-jaya) is attained.
3-45 Then the capacity of miniaturizing the body (aṇiman) and so on, as well as perfection of the body and immunity to dharma-s (natural constituents such as fire, water, wind etc. is also attained).
3-46 Bodily perfection means beauty, grace, strength, and solidity such as that of a diamond.
3-47 Through saṃyama on the perceiving (grahaṇa), intrinsic (svarūpa), individual (asmitā), relational (anvaya), and purposive (arthavattva) functions of the sense organs—mastery over them (indriya-jaya) is attained.
3-48 Hence quickness of mind, perception without the aid of the senses and mastery over the pradhāna (prakṛti, the objective world) are obtained.
3-49 (A yogin) fully absorbed in discernment (khyāti) of the difference between sattva and puruṣa obtains omniscience and mastery over every state of existence.
3-50 Dispassion (vairāgya) even toward this, with destruction of the doṣa (impurity) seeds, results in kaivalya (aloneness, freedom).
3-51 If invited by “higher beings” (sthānin-s, dwellers of “celestial regions”), neither pride nor desire should arise (in the yogin), lest unwanted attachments recur.
3-52 Through saṃyama on moment (kṣaṇa) and sequence (krama), knowledge born of discernment (viveka-jaṃ jñānam) is obtained.
3-53 Hence awareness (pratipatti) of (the distinction between) similar things, which cannot be distinguished by origin, characteristics, or location, is attained.
3-54 Knowledge born of discernment is nonsequential (akrama), all-encompassing (sarva-viṣaya), eternal (sarvathā-viṣaya), and liberative (tāraka).
3-55 When sattva and puruṣa are of equal purity, this is kaivalya.

4장 kaivalya (Aloneness, Freedom)
4-1 Yogic achievements (siddhi-s) are attainable by birth, or through herbs (or drugs), mantra, tapas, or samādhi.
4-2 The passage from one birth to another is due to the potency of prakṛti.
4-3 Incidental causes (nimitta) do not activate prakṛti, but merely remove obstacles, like a farmer (who irrigates his field by removing obstacles which block the natural flow of the water, explains Vyāsa).
4-4 Phenomenal consciousness (or individual consciousness, nirmāṇa-citta) emanate from asmitā-mātra (“pure asmitā”).
4-5 (Even though each phenomenal consciousness has its own) distinct activity, it is the “one consciousness” (cittam-ekam) which originates all the rest (the multiple phenomenal consciousnesses).
4-6 Among these, consciousness born of meditation (dhyāna) is without latent (karmic) deposit.
4-7 The action of a yogin is neither white nor black. The action of the others is of three types (white, black, white and black).
4-8 Thereof vāsanā-s (inborn karmic tendencies) arise according to their fruition (the fruition of each action-type).
4-9 Since memory and saṃskāra-s are one in essence, there is a causal relation (between action and its fruition), even if they are separated in terms of birth, place, and time.
4-10 (Saṃskāra-s) are beginning-less because the desire for continuity (āśiṣ) which sustains them is eternal.
4-11 Since (vāsanā-s) are intrinsically related to cause and effect, to (the citta or consciousness as) their substratum and to objects of consciousness (ālambana, toward which they are directed)—when these cease to exist, they (the vāsanā-s also) cease to exist.
4-12 Past and future exist (in the present) in their special form (“stored” in “karmic memory”). Owing to the time difference (adhva-bhedāt), their properties (dharma-s) are different.
4-13 The essence of these (properties)—whether manifest (in the case of the present) or subtle (in the case of past and future)—is the guṇa-s.
4-14 The suchness of an object is due to the consistency of its pariṇāma.
4-15 The object remains the same despite the multiplicity of consciousnesses as the two (object and consciousness) belong to separate levels of existence (panthan-s).
4-16 Moreover, the object does not depend on a single consciousness. (If that were the case), what would have happened to it (to the object) when not perceived by it (by that single consciousness)?
4-17 An object is known or unknown as much as the citta (consciousness) is “colored” by it (or acquires its form).
4-18 Mental activity (citta-vṛtti) is always known to its “master” (prabhu, namely puruṣa), owing to the unchangeability of puruṣa (or since puruṣa is “pariṇāma-less”).
4-19 It (the citta) is not a light-to-itself (i.e., the citta perceives objects but not itself), as it is seen (or “perceived” by puruṣa).
4-20 Furthermore, both cannot be perceived simultaneously.
4-21 Had one consciousness (citta) been perceived by another, it would have lead to infinite regression (atiprasaṅga) from one consciousness (buddhi) to another, and to intermixture of memories.
4-22 When the motionless “pure consciousness” (citi, namely puruṣa) takes the shape of that (of the citta, of phenomenal consciousness), “perception” (saṃvedana) of its own buddhi (“intellect,” i.e., “perception” of the citta and its vṛtti-s) takes place.
4-23 Owing to the fact that it is “colored” both by the seer (puruṣa) and the seen (objects), consciousness can disperse (i.e., perceive multiple objects simultaneously).
4-24 Although variegated by innumerable vāsanā-s, (consciousness) is for the sake of the other (puruṣa), owing to “collaborated activity” (saṃhatya-kāritvāt).
4-25 In the case of a viśeṣa-darśin (a yogin who sees the distinction between the citta and puruṣa), the pondering over one’s states of being (ātma-bhāva-bhāvanā) ceases.
4-26 Then, inclined toward discernment (viveka), the consciousness gravitates toward kaivalya.
4-27 In the interstices of this (as the consciousness approaches kaivalya), other mental content (may arise) from the saṃskāra-s.
4-28 The cessation (hāna) of these (saṃskāra-s) is said to be like (the cessation of) the kleśa-s.
4-29 (A yogin) who takes no interest whatsoever even in prasaṃkhyāna, achieves through yogic discernment (viveka-khyāti) the samādhi-stage of dharma-megha (“cloud of dharma”).
4-30 Then follows the cessation (nivṛtti) of kleśa-s and karma.
4-31 Then, due to the endlessness of knowledge from which every covering of impurity has been removed, that which remains to be known is little.
4-32 Then, having fulfilled their purpose, the sequence of change in the guṇa-s comes to an end.
4-33 Krama (sequence) is “the other” of kṣaṇa (moment), and is ascertained at the moment of the termination of change (pariṇāma-apara-anta).
4-34 kaivalya is the turning back of the guṇa-s to their source, once (their work) for the sake of puruṣa is accomplished; or, it is the power of pure consciousness (citi-śakti) abiding in its own essence.